02 Overview of the Chinese VJ
Concept of VJing:
VJ, short for Visual Jockey, is a profession that typically collaborates with DJs. While the DJ is responsible for mixing and playing music, the VJ focuses on the visual aspect, skillfully coordinating with the DJ to enhance the musical atmosphere. Their objective is to create a synchronized visual experience that complements the music, enriching the overall ambiance for the audience.
Additionally, Merrill Aldighieri, the first artist to use the term "Visual Jockey," defines it as video performers who "create an improvised live video feed to interpret the DJ's music." This term describes a performer in the club setting (Furs, 2023).
Based on interviews and literature review, I have summarized that VJing can be categorized into three types, with the first two being commercial activities and the third primarily serving non-commercial purposes:
a. Providing visual accompaniment for DJs in clubs, aiming to enhance the on-site atmosphere, often pursued as an individual profession;
b. Coordinating VJing with live music in large-scale commercial events (such as opening ceremonies, press conferences, electronic music festivals), typically operated as a team;
c. Artists specializing in audio-visual performance, distinguished by a relatively lower commercial focus, and emphasizing storytelling, artistic expression, and emotional communication in their creative endeavors. For most artists, VJing is considered a behavior, a tool, or a means of creation rather than a direct form of artistic content.
Development History
Currently, VJing in China is still in its early stages, and it is challenging to trace the exact beginnings of VJing in the country. However, we can review the history of nightclubs. The development of nightclubs in China began in the late 20th century, during the 1970s and 1980s, coinciding with the tail end of the international disco music trend [Fig.2-1]. Foreign disco culture flowed into China, and dance halls[Fig.2-2] became popular venues for dancing and socializing [Fig.2-3]. At that time, there was no one manipulating video playback, but there were vibrant and dazzling lights. VJ Tom mentioned, “The emergence of VJs should be around the late 1990s. Previously, at places like Suho Bar*, they didn't have specific performances. I think VJing started when performances became a thing. It wasn't until later, with the advent of electronic music, that they began performing with electronic dance music.”
The history of VJing in China can be traced back to the emergence of video art or MTV. The rise of video art, facilitated by the widespread availability of televisions, provided a visual form for the public. The introduction of MTV directly combined music and visuals, laying the foundation for the integration of music and visual arts. "However, unlike the development of Western visual arts history, China did not go through the phases of video art since the 1960s, experimental films in the 1970s, and the prevalent MTV culture of the 1980s in the West"*. (Guo, X, 2011). “The earliest practitioner of video art in China, Zhang Peili, completed his first video work, '30 × 30'[Fig.2-4 - Fig.2-7], in 1988, which was publicly displayed at the 'China Modern Art Exhibition' in 1989, marking the first video artwork in mainland China.” (Jiang, X, 2014).
“MTV, as a new art form, entered China in the 1990s. Starting in 1993, the continuous hosting of the China Music Television Awards by China Central Television greatly promoted the vigorous development and maturity of MTV in China” (Cheng, H, 2007). “The first domestic MV in China was the classic children's song 'Little Snail Horn'[Fig.2-8 - Fig.2-9],performed by Cheng Lin in 1985, and filmed by Beijing Television.” (Wikipedia). However, there is insufficient evidence to directly correlate the emergence of VJing in China with the development of video art and MTV.
Following this historical period, I have summarized several reasons for the emergence of VJ culture in China:
• The vigorous development of LED product technology and its application from 2003 to 2007 provided extensive opportunities for large-screen technology, creating a thriving market and facilitating the widespread application of large-screen technology in various fields.
• Inspired by foreign experiences, the operational model of domestic nightclubs actively incorporated the profession of VJ, making visual presentation an integral part of nightclub management.
• The phenomenon of foreign DJs bringing their own VJ performance teams to international electronic music festivals prompted domestic clubs to seriously consider how to enhance competitiveness through visual forms, surpassing the current reliance on music and lighting alone.
• Some overseas Chinese entrepreneurs, having accumulated experience in foreign clubs and electronic music festivals, returned to China to start their businesses. During the initial stages of entrepreneurship, they directly considered the VJ profession, gradually establishing this industry in the country.
Number
Through rough estimation, the number of VJs in nightclubs, bars, music festivals, and electronic music festivals across China is projected to be between 9,000 and 10,000 individuals. VJ Tom stated, “I can make an estimate: I think it should be around 9,000 to 10,000. Because I calculated it, considering my social circle, including TikTok, Bilibili, and other video platforms, adding up all my followers, currently, it's just over 10,000. Then, in the Resolume CN_VJ group, where only talented individuals can join, there are over 300[Fig.2-10]. [...] If we talk specifically about electronic music festivals, there should be a total of around 3,000 VJs.”
Distribution
The distribution of VJs is closely tied to the distribution of clubs and the development of electronic music. VJing in clubs is predominantly concentrated in major cities such as Beijing, Chengdu, Shanghai, and Guangzhou[Fig.2-11]. Creep : “ It would be beneficial to explore VJs in places other than Shanghai, such as Guangzhou, Beijing, and Chengdu, where many large clubs exist. Shanghai is too capital-centric; VJs can earn money, but creative freedom is not guaranteed.” Due to its proximity to Hong Kong, the Guangdong region has seen better development in VJing with the influx of electronic music and external culture, making the southern part of China more prosperous than the northern part. VJ Tom: “There are more VJs in the Guangdong region because people here have more exposure to electronic music. [...] In the southern part, there are indeed more than in the northern part. Many DJs and VJs in the north come from the south, probably because they have more exposure to electronic music.”
The uneven economic development in China, characterized by a mix of pre-modern, modern, and post-modern conditions, results in a stark contrast between club culture in first-tier cities and small towns. Taking my hometown Zhengzhou, the provincial capital of Henan, as an example, a large nightclub called Mexx in the city center, featured a stage and VJ performances, with charges based on seating arrangements ranging from 198 to 600 yuan(≈ 25-77 euros)[Fig.2-12]
However, in the small town I lived in, approximately 35 kilometers away from the city center, the best bar I've visited is Soul-Relieving Tavern[Fig.2-13]. It only has one projector used for playing songs and lyrics without Vj, and there are usually few guests.
“According to data published by the "Little Deer Corner Think Tank"* under the Music Economics umbrella, electronic musicians in China are distributed across various provinces and cities, but the landscape remains largely undeveloped. There is a lack of coherent training models and developmental soil, with the Guangdong region emerging as a key hub for the development of electronic music culture in the country”[Fig.2-14 & Fig.2-15]. (Entertainment Consumption Research Institute, 2023).
Job Content
The work of a VJ can be divided into two main components: software operation and hardware usage.
“In terms of software, VJs employ a variety of tools such as Resolume, Arkaos, Modul 8, VDMX, VisualJockey SP1, TouchDesigner, Max/MSP Jitter, Pure Data, VVVV, Processing, OpenFramework.” (VJ Elephant, 2020). Additionally, VJs may use post-production software for animation and editing, such as Premiere (Pr) and After Effects (Ae), and modeling software like Cinema 4D (C4D). The primary software choice varies among individual VJs. For instance, in interviews, Keefer mentioned using Unreal, Jimmz prefers Touch Designer, and TonyMark utilizes VVVV and Resolume.
“In terms of hardware, VJs utilize a diverse range of equipment, including Wii controllers, Xbox gamepads, flight joysticks, foot pedals, standard 25-key MIDI keyboards (e.g., M-AUDIO Oxygen 25), standard MIDI controllers (e.g., APC40), standard DJ MIDI controllers (e.g., Pioneer DDJ-SR), iPads, iPod touches, Kinect, and more.” (VJ Elephant, 2017).
VJ Tom: “After I started working with front-end devices in 2019, I began learning software in the following two years. This involved studying playback control software, post-production software, and other aspects like processors and servers. To simplify, everything a VJ does can be condensed from control to computer, computer to video processors, video switchers, and then connecting to screens.” [Fig.2-16]