03 Club VJ & Music Festival VJ
Club VJ:
In clubs, VJs are professionals who collaborate with DJs and lighting technicians to enhance the atmosphere of the venue. Typically individual practitioners, their performances are live and spontaneous, as VJs may not know what music the DJ will play. In the current nightclub culture in China, there is relatively low emphasis on visuals, with clubs relying on lighting technicians and DJs to create the atmosphere. Despite numerous DJ and lighting training programs in the country, there is a lack of dedicated training for VJs. Aspiring VJs often need to find mentors in nightclubs for apprenticeship, as club owners may have lower aesthetic expectations and less specific requirements for VJ content, leading to some VJs choosing to present similar or repetitive material on a daily basis.
Educational Background
Currently, individuals engaging in VJing in China typically undergo training through an apprenticeship system, where experienced practitioners within clubs personally impart their skills. The entire training system primarily revolves around imitation of preferred works, representing a form of mimicry. Often, they directly download materials from the internet for playback, lacking consideration and reflection on fundamental design issues*. Creep : “ Initially in China, VJing followed an apprenticeship model, with apprentices learning under experienced individuals within nightclubs. As of 2021, many still use pirated software like Resolume. Their entire system is based on imitation, a 'take it and use it' approach, without delving into the foundational questions of 'how,' 'what,' and 'why.' ”
Due to the generally low cultural literacy of practitioners and the scarcity of training in arts and design, aesthetic concepts have persisted for years without a profound understanding of design. TonyMark: “The awareness of nightclub VJs in China is insufficient because many VJs only have education backgrounds ranging from high school to college, and even college graduates are rare.” Jimmz: “Speaking of educational levels, European cultural and educational standards are undoubtedly higher. Therefore, the aesthetic foundation is quite different. The aesthetic foundation in China is perhaps more varied, and European VJs, with a better aesthetic foundation, create with a different artistic height in mind.”
Salary and Working Hours
The following information is sourced from the video blogger “Uncle TUTU”, who, starting as a VJ from scratch and later managing a nightclub, provided insights into VJ salaries and working hours in his Bilibili video on February 15, 2021 [Fig.3-1 & Fig.3-2] :
• Zero-based Apprentice
Monthly salary around 3000 RMB (≈392 euros), responsible for managing electrical switches, troubleshooting equipment, and playing early session MV videos. Does not perform live VJing.
• Advanced Apprentice
Monthly salary of 5000 RMB (≈653 euros), responsible for live sessions after 1:00 AM in the nightclub, suitable for apprentices transitioning from zero experience.
• VJ in Small Clubs
Monthly salary between 5000-8000 RMB (≈653-1045 euros).
• Assistant VJ in Clubs
Monthly salary of 12,000 RMB (≈1567 euros), apprentices transitioning to this role after working in small clubs. Responsible for the front stage before 22:00 and the explosive session at 00:00. Should avoid obvious mistakes with a significant number of guests, but not as intricate as the main stage.
• Main VJ in Clubs
Monthly salary of 15,000 RMB (≈1959 euros), responsible for the main stage at 23:00, typically an experienced professional who understands music structure. If they create their own materials, the monthly salary may be higher than 15,000 RMB.
• Post-production VJ
Monthly salary of 15,000+ RMB (≈1959+ euros), proficient in Resolume Arena, as well as Photoshop, After Effects, Premiere, and Cinema 4D. Creates bar, DJ, and MC logos and model animations.
• Console Supervisor/Visual Director
Monthly salary of 20,000+ RMB (≈2613+ euros), comprehensive understanding of nightclub positions, responsible for equipment preparation in the early stages of nightclub operations.)
However, the above data is for reference only, as the domestic COVID-19 situation in China has greatly impacted the nightclub economy. Currently, nightclubs in China are undergoing staff reductions for VJs, leading to a situation where VJ skills and salaries are quite chaotic. VJ Tom: “Salaries depend on the level because there are different levels, some earning 20,000 RMB(≈2613 euros), and others earning 6,000 RMB(≈777 euros). Today, I just met a VJ from a club in Hefei. He doesn't have many works or a portfolio. He jumped from a salary of 8,000 RMB(≈1045 euros) to 12,000 RMB(≈1567 euros), and then from 12,000 RMB to 20,000 RMB in just over a year. It's quite chaotic. [...] The number of VJs in a nightclub used to be around 4 people, but now it's down to 2 in some cases, and even 1 in others. Due to the current unfavorable environment, staff reductions have taken place.”
Existing Issues
• Lack of creative concepts and aesthetics:
The unique nature of the nightclub economy poses significant challenges for those involved in design and artistry on a commercial level. VJs’ responsibilities are often qualitatively defined as creating an atmosphere in the club, aiming to ignite the audience's enthusiasm and ensure a vibrant club ambiance. As a result, they lack a means of self-expression. TonyMark: “To put it plainly, nightclubs don't need VJs to express too much. Nightclubs only require VJs to play the most exciting content. Even in high-level nightclubs, VJs primarily focus on pleasing the audience, emphasizing the popular and local style.”
• Lack of copyright awareness:
The use of pirated software may be related to cost considerations, as software tends to be relatively expensive. Some nightclubs may opt for pirated software due to economic considerations.Keefer: “Many nightclubs in China have been using pirated software that hasn't been updated for years, resulting in outdated functionalities. They still rely on downloading materials from websites, with, at most, some animations created for the club's logo.”
Causes of the Issues
• Chinese education system:
Based on my own experience and observations, students need to exert significant effort to pass exams and secure a place in a good university. They invest a substantial amount of effort and cost to obtain quality education, to the extent that after graduation, they are not inclined to choose a profession like nightclub VJing, which offers low pay, poor treatment, disrupted sleep patterns, and lack of recognition. Their baseline expectations for employment have been elevated due to the high cost of education, and they hope that their advanced degrees will bring substantial returns. Creep : “Artists coming out of art schools are particularly lazy. They don't want to spend every night in the club working as a VJ; they want to engage in free creation, so they establish studios. ”
Development Trends
• Fresh Visual Styles
The nightclub industry is currently undergoing a wave of reflection on aesthetics and system operations. With an increasing number of international DJs performing in Chinese clubs, it has become common for them to bring their own VJing teams. This cross-cultural exchange has prompted a stronger reflection on aesthetics and system operations within domestic club VJing, forcing them to break away from rigid past models. Creep : “Even large domestic clubs are exploring new things and understanding the content and knowledge behind them. For example, starting in 2019, the entire industry began to embrace styles like 3D and cyber[Fig.3-3 & Fig.3-4], and domestically, they would first study how to create these things and then supplement their aesthetic and design knowledge. I think this is progress. ”
• Educational Enhancement
In addition, as more experienced VJs enter the field of education, the entire industry will continue to improve, but it will take time. TonyMark: “In terms of trends, in my opinion, it will take another 5 to 10 years to cultivate talent. Currently, there is a severe lack of good VJs, and the design education level of this group of people needs to be elevated for improvement to be possible.”

Music Festival VJ:
VJs in music festivals differ significantly from those in nightclubs in terms of visual presentation. Within China, large-scale commercial music festivals such as the Strawberry Music Festival, the MIDI Music Festival, the Modern Music Festival, and the Maitian Music Festival invite pop singers, bands, and rock musicians for performances. Audiences attending these music festivals primarily seek to enjoy the performances of their favorite artists. In large music festivals, the role of VJs is primarily to highlight the artists, serving as a background element. Additionally, some bands have their own VJs, contributing visually stunning effects that are meticulously rehearsed and aligned with the band's overarching vision. Moverover, VJs at electronic music festivals differ in visual presentation from those at large-scale commercial music festivals, they enjoy relatively more creative freedom.
Classification
• Commercial music festivals
a. Venue-Provided VJs
TonyMark mentions, “If you want a good VJ, it can be quite expensive. However, to cut costs, organizers often directly use those who provide LED screens for the music festival venue*. These VJs are associated with the current trend at many music festivals, where cost-effectiveness is a primary consideration.” Their main responsibility is to deliver basic visual effects that align with the overall requirements of the music festival. They typically do not have the flexibility for on-the-spot creativity and primarily broadcast images of artists directly captured by cameras. VJ-Tom adds, “Nowadays, it's mostly two big screens with portraits hanging there, and the lyrics are usually displayed. The visuals depend on the venue, as stability is the priority.”
b. Market-Found VJs
Organizers search for VJs based on the theme or overall style of the music festival. These VJs maintain a certain personal style in their creations while customizing their work according to the organizers' expectations. This approach showcases both the VJ's individual creativity and professional expertise, meeting the organizers' requirements for the overall visual effects.
c. Band's own VJ
Band's own VJ is characterized by its relative stability and high degree of freedom, which provides the VJ with greater room for progress and opportunities for rapid improvement. In terms of visual presentation, each performance showcases unique visuals that undergo improvement and enhancement while retaining distinctive visual features. Take, for example, the band “The Right to Reshape Statues”[Fig.3-5]. VJ-Tom states, “If a band has its own VJ, there are fewer limitations. Do you know a band called The Right to Reshape Statues? Their VJ has no limitations, and they can play different effects on a simple screen. It's all about using their imagination. They progress with every performance, doing quite well.”
• Electronic music festivals
VJs at electronic music festivals enjoy relatively more creative freedom, with fewer thematic restrictions. Most well-known electronic music festivals in China are imported from abroad, such as VAC China[Fig.3-6], EDC China, Ultra China, Creamfields, and more. Their task is to focus on the rhythm of electronic music, creating visuals that enhance the audience's sense of engagement and immersion*. VJ-Tom remarked, “The distinction between commercial music festivals and electronic music festivals is significant. Commercial music festivals tend to be more traditional, with well-prepared visuals in advance.”
Commercial music festivals Visual Content
As an example, taking the recent Strawberry Music Festival held in Guangzhou, China (November 18-19, 2023), this showcases the visual content classification of large-scale commercial music festivals. The Strawberry Music Festival is one of the largest music festivals in China, established in 2009 by Modern Sky, the largest independent record company in mainland China.(Wikipedia) The visuals displayed by VJs at the Strawberry Music Festival are somewhat representative.
• Portrait :
Screenshot from the video "Guangzhou Strawberry Music Festival - Full Video from the Sound Control Platform of The Life Journey," Video by zaso, sourced from bilibili, URL: https://www.bilibili.com/video/BV1zz4y1c7ve/?spm_id_from=333.337.search-card.all.click&vd_source=6dfad10505c04db615a4fe457ce2079b
• Lyrics :
Screenshot from the video “2023 Guangzhou Strawberry Music Festival - ChiliChill ‘Escape,’” video by -Little Star-, sourced from Bilibili, URL: https://www.bilibili.com/video/BV1Jb4y1u7EA/?spm_id_from=333.788.recommend_more_video.1&vd_source=6dfad10505c04db615a4fe457ce2079b
• Prepared Visuals:
Screenshot from the video “2023 Guangzhou Strawberry Music Festival - Secondhand Roses ‘Light and Fluttering’”,video by Evening Overtime, sourced from Bilibili, URL: https://www.bilibili.com/video/BV1LN4y1m78M/?spm_id_from=333.337.search-card.all.click&vd_source=6dfad10505c04db615a4fe457ce2079b
• The proportion of playing these visuals:
TonyMark: “In China, the majority prefer direct shots of portraits, broadcasting them live. While this is not bad because the audience wants to see the singers, besides that, if you explore more, you'll find that a significant percentage, for example, around 30%, involves direct shots of people with a bit of additional material layered on them. Another significant percentage, roughly 40-50%, or even 60%, involves adding pre-prepared visuals. Very few percentages, maybe less than 10% or even less than 5%, involve personal creations with some aesthetic and artistic elements included.”
However, based on the author's observation of live recordings, this ratio is not fixed. Portraits and visuals creation can appear simultaneously at the Strawberry Music Festival. The main screen in the center displays visual creation, while two side screens broadcast portraits or the crowds.
Screenshot from the video 'Strawberry Music Festival in Guangzhou "If Dream" Full-screen Panoramic Stable Version,' video by ClaudiaL, sourced from Bilibili, URL:https://www.bilibili.com/video/BV1vN4y1m7Uz/?spm_id_from=333.337.search-card.all.click&vd_source=6dfad10505c04db615a4fe457ce2079b
Existing Issues
• Market Saturation:
There is a relatively high number of VJs in the market, while the demand of the VJs for music festivals is limited, leading to intense competition. Many VJs struggle to find sufficient resources and opportunities. For example, when author sought interview subjects, I found the VJ studio "looploop." However, the studio manager indicated that they had ceased operations, highlighting the difficulty of sourcing resources in the industry. Additionally, VJ-Tom mentioned, 'I wouldn't recommend newcomers to learn VJ because the current environment is challenging. If you don't have any performance resources, lack creative ability, and ideas, and you're just looking to earn a high salary, I wouldn't advise you to learn VJ. Even if you learn it, there's no guarantee you'll find a job.
• Lack of Development Environment for Electronic Music
The prosperity of the VJs industry is closely tied to electronic music. However, the development of electronic music festivals in China faces significant government constraints. There are substantial limitations on the approval of large event venues domestically. According to the “Regulations on the Safety Management of Large-scale Mass Activities”: “events with attendance ranging from 1,000 to 5,000 participants require approval from county-level public security agencies, while those with over 5,000 participants need approval from municipal or directly governed city public security agencies.”
Moreover, when foreign DJs come to perform in China, there is also a scrutiny process for them. According to the “Notice on the Approval of Overseas Commercial Performances” : “it stipulates that the approval document for commercial performances must be verified through the 'Information System for Invitation Letter Management for Visa to China.” Failure to pass the verification process will result in the non-issuance of a visa.
VJ-Tom : “Firstly, the main issue domestically is the excessive restrictions. Even accessing the internet requires circumventing the Great Firewall. (Accessing YouTube in China requires using tools to bypass restrictions, such as a VPN, to watch videos.) The government's attitude toward electronic music is crucial. If there is effective promotion, the VJ industry would likely thrive. The challenge is that foreign DJs find it difficult to organize electronic music festivals in China, resulting in a shortage of quality resources. ”